AMPA receptors (AMPARs) are a subtype of the ionotropic 
glutamate receptors, which are the ‘work-horses’ of fast 
excitatory neurotransmission in the CNS. Developmentally 
and activity-regulated changes in the numbers and prop-
erties of AMPARs that are localized at the postsynaptic 
membrane are essential for excitatory synapse formation, 
stabil ization, synaptic plasticity and neural circuit forma-
tion. Consequently, the logistics of the delivery, retention 
and removal of individual AMPARs with defined sub unit 
compositions at specific synapses is highly complex. A typ-
ical cortical or hippocampal pyramidal neuron contains 
in the order of 10,000 synapses, and the AMPARs at each 
synapse are independently and dynamically regulated 
in response to developmental cues, synaptic activity and 
environmental stresses. Furthermore, defects in the pro-
cesses that control AMPAR assembly, trafficking and syn-
aptic expression are intimately linked to psychiatric and 
neurological conditions, as well as to cognitive decline in 
neurodegenerative diseases.
Remarkable progress has been achieved in under -
standing how AMPAR trafficking is coordinated by a 
large array of AMPAR-interacting proteins. These stud-
ies have established a set of hierarchical subunit-specific 
rules that control AMPAR trafficking under basal and 
activity-dependent conditions. Furthermore, there 
has been a growing appreciation that subunit compo -
sition can ‘tune’ the properties of AMPARs to specific 
conditions. Nonetheless, how AMPARs composed of 
different subunits are differentially trafficked to con -
trol synaptic development, stabilization and plasticity 
is a key un answered question. In this Review, we pro -
vide an overview of the current state of knowledge of 
subunit-specific AMPAR trafficking and outline what we 
believe to be the key unresolved questions in this field.
Subunit-specific trafficking
Most AMPARs are heterotetrameric assemblies of combi-
nations of the subunits GluA1, GluA2, GluA3 and GluA4. 
AMPARs are expressed in both neurons and glia through-
out the CNS 1 and have a turnover time of between 
10 hours and 2 days depending on the type of neuron 
and developmental stage2,3. Each subunit has an identi-
cal membrane topology and core structure comprising 
~900 amino acids with a molecular weight of ~105 kDa. 
The amino terminus is extracellular, and there are three 
membrane-spanning domains, one re-entrant loop 
domain and an intracellular carboxy-terminal domain. 
This C-terminal domain is a highly variable region that 
provides a platform for both the protein interactions 
and the post-translational modifications that regulate 
subunit-dependent trafficking and regulation (FIG. 1) (for 
reviews, see REFS 4–6).
Immuno-gold staining and electron microscopy 
studies have estimated that GluA3 is present at only 
~10% of the levels of GluA1 or GluA2 (REF. 7). Moreover, 
single-cell deletion studies reported that ~80% of syn -
aptic AMPARs in CA1 hippocampal neurons comprise 
GluA1–GluA2 heteromers8. However, other studies of 
subunit abundance in the rat hippocampus and cortex 
suggest that AMPARs are mainly heteromers containing 
GluA1 and GluA2 or GluA2 and GluA3 (REFS 8–10), with 
approximately equivalent amounts of each heteromer 
complex11. GluA4, conversely, is tightly developmentally 
regulated and is sparsely expressed at glutamatergic syn-
apses in principal neurons in the adult brain12. It should 
be noted, however, that GluA4 is a key determinant of 
the properties of AMPAR-mediated transmission in 
interneurons, especially in parvalbumin-containing 
inhibitory interneurons13,14.
School of Biochemistry, 
Centre for Synaptic Plasticity, 
Biomedical Sciences Building, 
University of Bristol, 
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
j.m.henley@bristol.ac.uk;
kevin.wilkinson@bristol.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrn.2016.37
Published online 15 Apr 2016
Ionotropic glutamate 
receptors
A family of glutamate-gated 
cation channels that can be 
subdivided into AMPA, NMDA 
and kainate receptors on the 
basis of their pharmacological 
properties.
Synaptic plasticity
The process by which synaptic 
transmission can strengthen or 
weaken in response to specific 
patterns of activity.
Synaptic AMPA receptor composition 
in development, plasticity and disease
Jeremy M. Henley and Kevin A. Wilkinson
Abstract | AMPA receptors (AMPARs) are assemblies of four core subunits, GluA1–4, that mediate 
most fast excitatory neurotransmission. The component subunits determine the functional 
properties of AMPARs, and the prevailing view is that the subunit composition also 
determines AMPAR trafficking, which is dynamically regulated during development, synaptic 
plasticity and in response to neuronal stress in disease. Recently, the subunit dependence of 
AMPAR trafficking has been questioned, leading to a reappraisal of this field. In this Review, we 
discuss what is known, uncertain, conjectured and unknown about the roles of the individual 
subunits, and how they affect AMPAR assembly, trafficking and function under both normal and 
pathological conditions.
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE  VOLUME 17 | JUNE 2016 | 337
REVIEWS
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
EFCYKSRSESKRMKGFCLIPQQSINEAIRTSTLPRNSGAGASSGGSGENGRVVSHDFPKSMQSIPCMSHSSGMPLGATGL809
906
GluA1
GluA2
CaMKII 
or PKC SAP97PKA
EFCYKSRAEAKRMKVAKNAQNINPSSSQNSQNFATYKEGYNVYGIESVKI
• NSF
• AP2
PKA
• PICK1
• ABP or GRIP
834
883
N
Q/R
a b
c
CCytosol
GluA2-
lacking
Unedited 
GluA2-
containing
Edited 
GluA2-
containing
CP-AMPARs CI-AMPAR
RQ
Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
PDZ domain
A structural domain of 80–90 
amino acids that binds cognate 
proteins containing a short 
carboxy-terminal PDZ ligand. 
Among other functions, PDZ 
interactions anchor receptor 
proteins in the membrane to 
cytoskeletal components.
Long-term potentiation
(LTP). The persistent 
strengthening of synaptic 
transmission that is mainly due 
to increased numbers of 
postsynaptic AMPA receptors.
Long-term depression
(LTD). A long-lasting decrease 
in synaptic strength that is 
mainly due to reduced 
numbers of postsynaptic 
AMPA receptors.
Research over the past 20 years has resulted in the 
prevailing view that a canonical hierarchy of subunit-  
specific rules coordinates the properties and traffick -
ing of AMPARs, in a manner that is dependent on their 
intracellular C termini. GluA1 is dominant in activity- 
dependent recruitment of AMPARs to synapses. This 
is mediated by phosphorylation of GluA1 by calcium/
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and 
interaction with synaptic PDZ domain-containing proteins 
that recruit and retain GluA1–GluA2 AMPARs at synapses 
during the induction of long-term potentiation (LTP)15,16. 
Once the GluA1-mediated increase in AMPAR number is 
established, interactions with GluA2 take over to control 
constitutive and activity-dependent AMPAR endocytosis 
and long-term depression (LTD)10,17. This model fits well 
with the general concept that the differential trafficking 
of individual subunits has fundamentally important roles 
in the regulation of excitatory synapses. However, as dis-
cussed below, this model has been challenged by several 
recent reports, including reports that interrogated the roles 
of specific AMPAR subunits in activity-dependent traffick-
ing and synaptic plasticity18,19, the C-terminal tails of the 
subunits and the PDZ ligands20,21, as well as changes to 
their phosphorylation status22. Taken together, these find-
ings have initiated a reappraisal of the core mechanisms 
underlying the synaptic incorporation of AMPARs.
Subunit-independent trafficking
The concept that subunit composition is the defining 
factor in the AMPAR trafficking underlying plasticity 
has been called into question by acute AMPAR sub -
unit knockdown and molecular replacement stud -
ies18,19. Contrary to expectations, when using a strong 
LTP induction protocol, it was reported that no specific 
AMPAR subunit is required for LTP . Remarkably, LTP 
still occurred even if all AMPAR subunits were removed 
and replaced with kainate receptors (KARs). These results 
suggest that the only fundamental requirement for LTP 
is the availability of sufficient numbers of extra synaptic 
surface-expressed receptors (of any type) that can be 
recruited to the postsynaptic membrane to increase 
responsiveness to the glutamate released from the pre-
synaptic terminal. Taken at face value, these data directly 
contradict the prevailing dogma that the recruitment of 
Figure 1 | AMPAR receptor topology and properties. a | Schematic depicting the membrane topology of an AMPA 
receptor (AMPAR) subunit. Each subunit has an extracellular amino‑terminal glutamate‑binding site, three full 
transmembrane domains, an intracellular re‑entrant loop, which is the site of Q607R editing in the GluA2 subunit, and 
an intracellular carboxy terminus. The subunits combine to form tetramers, and most AMPARs are heterotetrameric. 
b | AMPARs lacking GluA2 subunits (non‑GluA2 subunits are shown in peach) are calcium permeable. Similarly, 
AMPARs containing the GluA2 subunit (light blue) in its unedited (Q; red) form also gate calcium. However, the presence 
of a GluA2 subunit that has been RNA edited to replace Q607 with an arginine (R; dark blue) renders the AMPAR 
impermeable to calcium. c | Sequences of the intracellular C‑terminal tails of the predominant isoforms of human 
GluA1 and GluA2, indicating interaction and post‑translational modification sites, are shown. Key serine residues that 
can be phosphorylated by calcium/calmodulin‑dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and protein kinase C (PKC) are 
shown in pink. PDZ ligand sequences are shaded in green, and important PDZ protein interactors for GluA1 and GluA2 
are listed. The residues in the GluA2 sequence shaded grey represent where N‑ethylmaleimide sensitive factor (NSF) 
and AP2 proteins interact to regulate endocytosis. ABP , AMPAR‑binding protein; CI‑AMPAR, Ca2+‑impermeable AMPAR; 
CP‑AMPAR, Ca2+‑permeable AMPAR; GRIP , glutamate receptor‑interacting protein; PICK1, protein interacting with 
C kinase 1; SAP97, synapse‑associated protein 97.
REVIEWS
338 | JUNE 2016 | VOLUME 17  www.nature.com/nrn
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
Presynaptic 
bouton
LTP induction
Synaptic 
vesicle
AMPAR
TARP
Constitutive 
recycling
AMPAR
exocytosis
Actin PSD95
P
P
P P P P
Spine
Dendrite
Lateral 
diﬀusion
Membrane-associated 
guanylate kinase
(MAGUK). A superfamily of 
multidomain, catalytically inert 
scaffolding proteins that 
facilitate interactions between 
cytoskeletal proteins, 
microtubule- or actin-based 
machinery and molecules 
involved in signal transduction.
Auxiliary subunits
Specialized transmembrane 
components of the AMPA 
receptor complex that 
modulate forward trafficking 
and the pharmacological and 
functional properties of the 
surface-expressed receptor.
GluA1 is absolutely necessary for the initial stages of LTP 
and that specific point mutations within the C terminus 
of GluA1 prevent plasticity23,24.
Clearly, further work is required to reconcile this con-
troversy. One possible explanation is that subunit-specific 
AMPAR trafficking pathways predominate under nor-
mal circumstances, but that very intense saturating 
LTP protocols can drive subunit-independent plas -
ticity. Nonetheless, if future studies confirm that any 
AMPAR, or even KAR, subunit can substitute for any 
other AMPAR subunit then, although there may be a 
role for subunit-specific mechanisms in AMPAR traf -
ficking, at the most basic level the core processes of LTP 
and LTD must be subunit independent. Moreover, this 
would mean that synaptic plasticity is not reliant on the 
interacting proteins that differentially recognize different 
AMPAR subunits. If this is indeed the case, then the most 
conceptually straightforward process for the regulation of 
the numbers of synaptic AMPARs would be by chang-
ing the underlying synaptic organization to increase or 
decrease the numbers of synaptic AMPARs that can be 
accommodated at the postsynaptic membrane. In this 
scenario, it would be the manipulation of the number of 
place-holders (or slot proteins), rather than the AMPARs 
themselves, that would dictate plasticity (FIG. 2).
In this model, the essential underlying mechanisms 
of functional plasticity would require ultrastructural 
rearrangement to recruit and retain, or to release and 
remove, ligand-gated glutamate receptors at the post -
synaptic density (PSD), bypassing the need for an 
AMPAR subunit-specific process. Obvious examples 
of candidate place-holders are the membrane-associated 
guanylate kinase  (MAGUK) proteins, a family of large 
PDZ domain-containing scaffolds, of which PSD95 (also 
known as DLG4) is the prototypical member. Indeed, 
photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM) and 
single-molecule immuno  labelling have shown that 
AMPARs colocalize with dense and dynamically regu-
lated nanodomains of PSD95 at the postsynapse in living 
neurons25,26. However, as there are approximately fivefold 
more PSD95 scaffolds than AMPARs at synapses27 and as 
CaMKII, which is essential for LTP , actually destabilizes 
synaptic PSD95 (REF. 28), it seems implausible that simply 
increasing the amount of synaptic PSD95 underlies LTP . 
Therefore, the place-holders are most likely not to be indi-
vidual proteins but to be combinations of proteins that 
allow the activity-dependent recruitment and stabilization 
of synaptic AMPARs (or other synaptic receptors).
An emerging model for the synaptic retention of 
AMPARs involves the transmembrane AMPAR regulatory 
proteins (TARPs), AMPAR auxiliary subunits that regulate 
important aspects of receptor trafficking, channel activity 
and pharmacology29. Owing to incompatible PDZ ligands, 
AMPARs do not bind directly to the synaptic scaffold pro-
tein PSD95. Instead, TARPs bind to PSD95-like MAGUKs 
to stabilize the AMPAR–TARP complex at synapses30. The 
prototypical TARP is stargazin (also known as γ2 and 
CACNG2), which was initially identified in the naturally 
occurring mutant stargazer mouse that lacks functional 
AMPARs at cerebellar granule cell synapses31,32. Upon LTP 
induction, CaMKII-mediated phosphorylation of star-
gazin increases its binding to PSD95, providing a model 
Figure 2 | The slot hypothesis of LTP . A widely accepted model of long‑term potentiation (LTP) suggests that AMPA 
receptors (AMPARs) laterally diffuse within the plasma membrane and are trapped at synapses by slot proteins at the 
postsynaptic membrane. Before LTP induction (left), AMPARs are localized to postsynaptic density protein 95 
(PSD95)‑containing nanodomains that are anchored to the actin cytoskeleton in spines. The AMPARs are retained within 
these domains through interactions between transmembrane AMPAR regulatory proteins (TARPs) and PSD95, but they are 
continually repositioned within the PSD because of constitutive actin filament dynamics. Extrasynaptic AMPARs laterally 
diffuse within the membrane, and the number of surface‑expressed AMPARs is maintained by constitutive recycling in the 
spine and dendrite. Induction of LTP increases the AMPAR‑binding capacity of the slot proteins, potentially through 
phosphorylation (denoted by the P) of the TARP stargazin, enhancing its binding to PSD95. This results in the entrapment 
of laterally diffusing AMPARs and potentiation of the synapse. In addition, net AMPAR exocytosis replenishes the pool of 
extrasynaptic receptors.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE   VOLUME 17 | JUNE 2016 | 339
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
RNA editing
A post-transcriptional 
modification process that 
changes an RNA molecule to 
insert, delete or substitute 
nucleotides. Editing of the 
base A→ I at a specific site 
results in the substitution of 
Q with R in almost all GluA2 
subunits in the CNS.
Ca2+-impermeable AMPARs
(CI-AMPA receptors). 
T etrameric assemblies 
containing the RNA-edited 
form of the GluA2 subunit in 
which the uncharged amino 
acid glutamine (Q) is changed 
to the positively charged 
arginine (R) in the ion channel.
Ca2+-permeable AMPARs
(CP-AMPA receptors). 
AMPA receptors are 
calcium permeable when 
they lack GluA2 or contain 
unedited GluA2.
for how LTP induction may be coupled to the retention 
of synaptic AMPARs, and supporting the view that LTP 
is mediated by an increased affinity of AMPARs for the 
underlying synaptic architecture33,34. However, given that 
TARPs do not bind to KARs and that, unlike the situation 
for AMPARs, activation of CaMKII increases KAR lateral 
mobility35, how this model can explain the ability of KARs 
to substitute for AMPARs in their absence is unclear.
In addition to the TARPs, the discovery that multi-
ple synaptic transmembrane adhesion molecules, such 
as N-cadherin36,37 and the LRRTM family 38,39, are able 
to cluster AMPARs raises the possibility that these pro-
teins are also candidate place-holders, and suggests that 
different modes of receptor recruitment may prevail 
depending on the synapse and available population of 
extrasynaptic receptors.
Importantly, the subunit-dependent and subunit-  
independent modes of AMPAR trafficking are not 
neces sarily mutually exclusive. A widely accepted model 
suggests that laterally diffusing receptors are captured 
at synapses during LTP , and that extrasynaptic recep-
tors are replenished by the exocytosis of new receptors40 
(FIG. 2). Thus, although synaptic capture may be flexible 
enough to incorporate all types of glutamate receptors, 
under normal conditions in which AMPARs are present, 
subunit- and TARP-dependent trafficking rules probably 
control LTP induction and stabilization. That said, given 
the radical nature of this subunit-independent AMPAR 
trafficking concept, and the fact that the identities of 
the proteins involved are not known, these issues will 
undoubtedly be the focus of concerted future research, 
and we anticipate that the main points of controversy 
will be resolved in the relatively near future.
Ca2+-permeable AMPARs
In the adult brain, the overwhelming majority of 
AMPARs contain an alternative form of the GluA2 sub-
unit that is produced by RNA editing that renders the ion 
channel Ca2+-impermeable (resulting in Ca2+-impermeable 
AMPARs (CI-AMPARs)) (BOX 1). Although fairly uncom-
mon, Ca2+-permeable AMPARs  (CP-AMPARs) are also 
present in mature neurons9 and, as discussed below, their 
expression can be dynamically regulated under basal, 
activated and stressed conditions.
Although CP-AMPARs can arise from either the lack 
of GluA2 or the presence of an unedited GluA2 in the 
receptor complex, the fact that less than 1% of all GluA2 
RNA encodes unedited GluA2(Q) in the adult brain 41 
argues for the fact that most CP-AMPARs lack GluA2. 
Nonetheless, some reports propose that CP-AMPARs that 
contain unedited GluA2 can contribute to excitotoxicity 
(for a review, see REF. 42).
CP‑AMPARs in synaptic plasticity. Many reports have 
implicated the regulated expression of CP-AMPARs in 
electrophysiologically evoked synaptic plasticity (reviewed 
in REFS 43–46), and it is becoming increasingly clear that 
plasticity of CP -AMPARs also occurs during various 
behavioural paradigms in vivo (BOX 2). An emerging con-
sensus is that the transient expression of CP-AMPARs 
contributes to the induction, but not to the maintenance, 
of LTP . More specifically, several studies have suggested 
that LTP stimulation in 3 -week-old rat hippocampal 
CA1 neurons evokes an initial insertion of homomeric 
GluA1 into the postsynaptic membrane. Experiments 
using philanthotoxin -433 (PhTX-433), which selec -
tively blocks GluA2 -lacking AMPARs 47, showed that 
PhTX-433 application during and immediately after LTP 
induction prevents LTP expression. However, PhTX-
433 had no effect after LTP had been established, indi-
cating that LTP requires the transient incorporation of 
GluA2-lacking CP-AMPARs, which are then replaced 
with GluA2-containing CI-AMPARs48–50.
During LTP induction, CP -AMPARs are recruited 
to synapses from perisynaptic pools to contribute to 
enhanced synaptic Ca2+ entry49–51. The Ca2+ that is gated 
through CP -AMPARs then has a role in recruiting 
CI-AMPARs. CP-AMPAR-gated Ca 2+ also facilitates 
structural plasticity by the activation of the small GTPase 
RAC1 and the downstream PAK–LIM kinase pathway, 
which increases spine size via the modulation of actin 
dynamics52. In this model, until CP-AMPARs are replaced 
by CI-AMPARs, LTP remains labile and easily reversed. 
It should be noted, however, that the involvement of 
CP-AMPARs in LTP is not universally accepted 5,53–55. 
Thus, whether, how and to what extent CP -AMPARs 
are incorporated during LTP remains an active area 
of research.
In addition to LTP , several studies have reported spe-
cific trafficking of CP-AMPARs during LTD. For example, 
the selective removal of CP-AMPARs mediates a specific 
form of depolarization-induced LTD that only occurs in 
neonatal synapses56. Furthermore, although the presence 
of CP-AMPARs in hippocampal neurons under basal con-
ditions remains controversial, it has been reported that the 
removal of extrasynaptic CP-AMPARs in CA1 pyramidal 
neurons is associated with LTD51.
A change in the calcium permeability of AMPARs 
mediates a form of synaptic plasticity in granule cell–
stellate cell synapses in the cerebellum. Unusually, 
postsynaptic AMPARs at this synapse are predomi -
nantly calcium permeable57. However, high-frequency 
stimulation causes changes in rectification, excitatory 
postsynaptic current (EPSC) amplitude and sensitiv -
ity to PhTX-433, and these alterations are indicative of 
Box 1 | Synaptic AMPAR composition — the importance of the GluA2 subunit
AMPA receptor (AMPAR) subunit composition is a crucial determinant of the 
conductance, trafficking and calcium permeability of these receptors. Primarily, these 
properties are conferred by the presence or absence of the GluA2 subunit. In the brain, 
the vast majority (>99%) of GluA2 mRNA exists in an edited form, resulting in a change 
from glutamine to arginine at position 607 (REF. 150). This alteration of charge, which 
occurs in the channel pore, blocks the passage of Ca2+ ions, prevents the channel 
from being blocked by intracellular polyamines and reduces the single-channel 
conductance of the receptor151. Notably, Q/R editing at position 607 also alters the 
trafficking properties of GluA2-containing receptors through the biosynthetic pathway. 
Thus, AMPARs either lacking GluA2 or containing unedited GluA2 are calcium 
permeable, show higher single-channel conductance and are inwardly rectifying owing 
to voltage-dependent block by intracellular polyamines, but receptors containing 
edited GluA2 are calcium impermeable and exhibit a lower single-channel 
conductance and a linear voltage–current relationship152.
REVIEWS
340 | JUNE 2016 | VOLUME 17  www.nature.com/nrn
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
Homeostatic synaptic 
scaling
A feedback mechanism by 
which a neuron can upregulate 
or downregulate its synaptic 
responsiveness in response to 
sustained alterations in activity.
Silent synapses
Synapses that contain 
postsynaptic NMDA receptors 
but that lack AMPA receptors, 
rendering the synapse silent 
at resting membrane potential.
a switch to GluA2-containing CI-AMPARs57. As extra-
synaptic AMPARs in stellate cells contain GluA2, it has 
been proposed that this form of plasticity occurs via Ca2+ 
influx through CP -AMPARs57 and metabotropic glu -
tamate receptor (mGluR)-dependent 58 recruitment of 
GluA2-containing CI-AMPARs from extrasynaptic sites 
(see below).
The suppression of synaptic activity increases syn -
aptic AMPARs by homeostatic synaptic scaling 59. The 
initial phases of scaling are mediated by CP -AMPARs 
as more GluA1 than GluA2 is recruited to synapses60,61. 
Furthermore, CP-AMPAR-selective inhibitors block the 
increase in synaptic current, and suppression of synaptic 
activity is associated with local dendritic translation of 
GluA1, providing a rapid source of AMPARs and sug-
gesting that the inserted CP -AMPARs are likely to be 
GluA1 homomers62.
Other mechanisms for inducing synaptic scaling, 
including the application of tumour necrosis factor 
(TNF)63 or the ablation of ARC (also known as ARG3.1)64, 
also selectively recruit GluA2 -lacking CP -AMPARs 
to synapses, but these mechanisms have not yet been 
defined. It should be noted, however, that despite these 
reports, several studies have failed to detect the specific 
incorporation of CP-AMPARs during homeostatic scal-
ing (see, for example, REF. 65), suggesting that this specific 
incorporation of CP-AMPARs may be dependent on the 
synapse, developmental stage and mode of induction. 
Thus, as for the proposed involvement of CP-AMPARs in 
LTP , the differential recruitment of CP-AMPARs during 
homeostatic scaling remains controversial.
Subunit expression during development
The profiles of AMPAR subunit expression and receptor 
assembly change markedly during development. Most 
notably, early in development, many synapses contain 
GluA2 -lacking CP -AMPARs, which are exchanged 
for GluA2-containing CI -AMPARs after the second 
postnatal week 66. GluA2 expression is low compared 
with GluA1 expression soon after birth, which is consist-
ent with GluA2-lacking CP-AMPARs being important for 
neonatal synaptic function67. Predominant expression of 
GluA1 is highly developmentally restricted, and in the 
rat almost all AMPAR-positive synapses express GluA2 
by postnatal day 14 (P14)68. Interestingly, specific factors 
that are secreted from astrocytes directly affect the subunit 
composition and surface expression of synaptic AMPARs 
during development (for a review, see REF. 69).
It has also been reported that, early in development, 
GluA4 homomers are preferentially inserted into silent 
synapses  at P5–P7 in an activity- and NMDA recep -
tor (NMDAR)-dependent, but CaMKII-independent, 
manner 12. These GluA4 homomers are subsequently 
exchanged for GluA2-containing receptors by a consti-
tutive process that maintains synaptic strength. Thus, 
GluA4 trafficking underpins GluA1 -independent 
developmental LTP and provides the mechanism for 
delivering AMPARs to previously silent synapses 12. 
Furthermore, there is another shift in the composition 
of AMPARs by P21, as GluA3 levels increase and GluA1 
levels decline. As AMPARs that contain GluA3 show 
reduced deactivation and desensitization compared with 
GluA1-containing AMPARs70, this probably accounts for 
the developmental increase in the duration of AMPAR 
responses, postsynaptic excitability and the reduction in 
LTP threshold71.
RNA editing, AMPAR assembly and ER exit
AMPAR tetramers are formed in the endoplasmic retic-
ulum (ER) as a dimer of dimers 72,73. The initial dimer-
ization of two subunits is dependent on interactions 
between their N-terminal domains (NTDs) followed by 
a second dimerization step that is mediated by associa-
tions at the ligand-binding and membrane domains 74. 
The default mode is initial heterodimeric assembly, 
which preferentially incorporates GluA2 into the nas -
cent receptor. However, there is considerable flexibility 
in the NTD dimer interface that allows the formation 
of GluA2 -lacking AMPARs when appropriate to the 
relevant physiological and pathological conditions75.
Most assembled AMPAR tetramers contain GluA2 
(REF. 9), and this is strongly regulated by Q/R editing 
of the GluA2 subunit. GluA1 is not edited and, in the 
absence of GluA2, GluA1 assembles into CP-AMPARs 
that can be rapidly exported from the ER and trafficked 
to the plasma membrane 76. Unedited GluA2(Q607), 
where it exists, also traffics rapidly through the ER to the 
plasma membrane. By contrast, edited GluA2(R607), 
Box 2 | Functional roles of CP‑AMPAR trafficking in plasticity in vivo
Consistent with an important role for selective Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptor 
(CP-AMPAR) trafficking in brain function, a growing number of studies have observed 
alterations in CP-AMPAR trafficking in vivo.
• Single whisker stimulation in the absence of adjacent whiskers enhances spared 
whisker responses in the neocortex, and leads to a potentiation of AMPAR excitatory 
postsynaptic currents (EPSCs), through the incorporation of GluA2-lacking 
CP-AMPARs153.
• Visual deprivation through dark-rearing rats increases AMPAR EPSCs at layer 2/3 
pyramidal neurons in the visual cortex but reduces them in the somatosensory and 
auditory cortices154. The in vivo homeostatic upscaling in the visual cortex is mediated 
via increased CP-AMPARs and is absent in GluA1-S845A mice155.
• In fear conditioning, a conditioned stimulus (for example, sound) is paired with an 
adverse stimuli (for example, footshock). Following training, a fear response is 
elicited to the conditioned stimulus alone. This requires GluA1 S845 
phosphorylation and recruitment of CP-AMPARs at thalamic synapses on amygdala 
neurons156. Fear extinction occurs through metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 
(mGluR1)-mediated removal of CP-AMPARs at these synapses156.
• The mechanisms of addiction also involve CP-AMPAR trafficking. At glutamatergic 
synapses onto dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area, a single cocaine 
administration drives protein interacting with C kinase 1 (PICK1)-dependent synaptic 
insertion of GluA2-lacking CP-AMPARs157,158. As with fear extinction, this is reversed 
by mGluR1 activation, suggesting that mGluR1-dependent long-term depression 
(LTD) may represent a general mechanism to reverse CP-AMPAR upregulation157. 
Similarly, CP-AMPARs increase in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) in rats during cocaine 
withdrawal and their blockade reduces cue-induced cocaine seeking, which is 
consistent with roles in addiction159.
Therefore, there is strong evidence that CP-AMPARs have a crucial role in vivo. Overall, 
synaptic CP-AMPARs can tune neuronal excitability to induce plasticity and their 
activity-dependent removal can define a time frame in which memories can be erased. 
These changes parallel observations in in vitro systems, whereby plasticity induced by 
CP-AMPAR incorporation remains transient until these receptors are ultimately 
replaced by Ca2+-impermeable AMPARs (CI-AMPARs).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE   VOLUME 17 | JUNE 2016 | 341
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
Nucleus
ER
Golgi
GluA2 homomer
GluA1- and GluA2-containing heteromerGluA1 homomer
Unedited GluA2-containing AMPAR
Unassembled GluA2 subunit
CaMKII
PICK1
Ca2+
Export from 
ER to Golgi
AMPAR-
containing 
vesicle
mRNA
Presynaptic 
bouton
Spine
Dendrite
which accounts for more than 99% of all GluA2, is 
mostly unassembled and retained within the ER. Thus, 
in studies primarily using exogenous expression of GluA1 
or GluA2, Q/R editing reduces the formation of GluA2 
homotetramers and only allows GluA2 to exit from the 
ER when it is assembled with GluA1. AMPARs that 
contain both GluA1 and GluA2 follow GluA1 traffick-
ing rules and override the ER retention of GluA2. Thus, 
GluA1–GluA2 heteromers rapidly traffic from the ER to 
the surface, whereas AMPARs without GluA1 or GluA4 
transit much more slowly77,78 (FIG. 3). It is important to 
stress, however, that the possible roles of GluA3 in ER exit 
have not been systematically investigated.
Therefore, in addition to making GluA2-containing 
AMPARs Ca2+ impermeable, Q/R editing also promotes 
interaction with GluA1 to form heterotetrameric chan-
nels79. This regulated ER exit limits the types and num-
bers of AMPARs that are available for synapses and, by 
disfavouring GluA2 homotetramer formation, maintains 
a stable ER pool of edited GluA2, which is required 
for the formation of GluA2 -containing heteromeric 
AMPARs later in development80,81.
Importantly, because it takes longer for edited GluA2 
to incorporate into assembling AMPARs, the reduced ER 
dwell time of unedited GluA2 facilitates the rapid forward 
traffic and surface expression of CP -AMPARs during 
synapse formation and stabilization early in develop -
ment82. As the CNS matures, developmentally controlled 
RNA editing of GluA2 progressively hinders its homo-
dimerization and retards ER exit, which then increases 
the incorporation of GluA2 into AMPAR heteromers, 
which is consistent with the switch from CP-AMPARs 
to CI-AMPARs during brain development. Interestingly, 
it has recently been shown that GluA2 forward traffick-
ing is also regulated by intracellular Ca2+ release, CaMKII 
activation and interaction with protein interacting with 
C kinase 1 (PICK1) to facilitate ER exit, which may imply 
synaptic control of forward trafficking in neurons83.
The TARP and cornichon families of AMPAR auxil-
iary subunits (see below) also influence AMPAR assem-
bly and forward trafficking. More specifically, TARPs 
act as chaperones that prevent the ER exit of incorrectly 
folded AMPARs84. Moreover, TARPs are essential for ER 
export of correctly assembled receptors 85 and remain 
Figure 3 | Subunit‑specific AMPAR trafficking through the secretory pathway. AMPA receptors (AMPARs) are 
synthesized and assembled in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which extends throughout the neuron. The stoichiometry 
of assembly and ER exit are highly regulated. GluA1‑containing AMPARs or AMPARs containing unedited GluA2 traffic 
readily through the ER to the cell surface. However, edited GluA2 is retained in the ER, resulting in a stable ER‑resident 
pool of unassembled GluA2, but this retention can be overcome when the subunits assemble into heteromeric receptors 
containing both GluA1 and GluA2. ER release of GluA2‑containing AMPARs can be controlled by calcium/calmodulin‑ 
dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and protein interacting with C kinase 1 (PICK1) in an activity‑dependent manner via 
increased intracellular calcium levels, and is also strongly influenced by association with auxiliary proteins (not shown). 
From the ER, assembled AMPARs progress to the Golgi and then on to the plasma membrane, where they undergo lateral 
diffusion and can be retained at synapses. In addition to this route through the secretory pathway, local translation of 
AMPARs utilizing the ER in dendrites and, potentially, dendritic Golgi outposts (not shown), can provide a rapid source 
of AMPARs under activity‑dependent conditions.
REVIEWS
342 | JUNE 2016 | VOLUME 17  www.nature.com/nrn
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
P
Lysosome
LTD inductionHomeostatic scaling
PSD95
Actin
P
CI-AMPAR
CP-AMPAR
Constitutive recycling
Lateral 
diﬀusion
Basal conditions
Extrasynaptic 
AMPAR
Dephosphorylation
PKA
/uni2193 CaN
P
PP
Local 
translation
LTP induction
P
P P
P
PKA
AKAP150
PICK1
PICK1 P
part of the AMPAR complex throughout Golgi pro -
cessing and forward trafficking until eventual surface 
expression at the PSD 86. Similarly, cornichons have a 
well-defined role in the export of specific proteins from 
the ER87,88, including AMPARs89,90.
Mechanisms of subunit-specific trafficking
Role of interacting proteins.  Individual AMPAR sub -
units have either long or short intracellular C-terminal 
domains (tails) that bind to distinct sets of interacting 
proteins. Remarkable progress has been made in iden-
tifying how these interacting proteins affect AMPAR 
biosynthesis, trafficking, scaffolding, stability, signalling 
and turnover (for reviews, see REFS 4–6). The main splice 
isoforms of GluA1 and GluA4 have long tails, and GluA2 
and GluA3 have short tails. Generally, the long-tailed 
GluA1 and GluA4 subunits dictate the trafficking prop-
erties of AMPARs when assembled in heteromers with 
short-tailed subunits and, as GluA4 is mainly expressed 
during early development, GluA1 is by far the most pre-
dominant long-tailed subunit in mature neurons. The 
observation that CP-AMPARs and CI-AMPARs are dif-
ferentially trafficked during several forms of plasticity 
raises the question of how these receptors are distin -
guished by interacting proteins to promote or to reduce 
the synaptic incorporation of particular subtypes. Many 
aspects remain to be resolved, but core concepts of how 
this is achieved are beginning to emerge (FIG. 4).
Figure 4 | CP‑AMPAR trafficking in hippocampal plasticity. Under basal conditions, synaptic AMPA receptors (AMPARs) 
are predominantly calcium impermeable and are anchored to postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD95) and the actin 
cytoskeleton. They undergo both lateral diffusion in the membrane and rapid constitutive recycling. Furthermore, under 
certain conditions, Ca2+‑permeable AMPARs (CP‑AMPARs) can be observed extrasynaptically. During long‑term 
potentiation (LTP) induction, activation of protein kinase A (PKA), which is anchored at synapses by the scaffold protein 
AKAP150, leads to phosphorylation (indicated by the P) of GluA1 at S845 in both spines and dendrites, promoting its 
surface expression and leading to the appearance of synaptic CP‑AMPARs. In addition, enhanced binding of protein 
interacting with C kinase 1 (PICK1) to GluA2‑containing Ca2+‑impermeable AMPARs (CI‑AMPARs) in intracellular vesicles 
restricts their recycling to the cell surface, thus further enhancing the ratio of CP‑AMPARs to CI‑AMPARs. During activity 
deprivation to induce synaptic homeostatic scaling, calcineurin (CaN) activity is reduced, favouring PKA‑mediated 
phosphorylation of GluA1 subunits at S845, and promoting surface expression of GluA1‑containing AMPARs and their 
synaptic incorporation. Furthermore, induction of homeostatic scaling via NMDA receptor (NMDAR) blockade promotes 
the local translation of GluA1 in dendrites, and an increase in surface expression of GluA1‑containing CP‑AMPARs. 
By contrast, long‑term depression (LTD) is associated with dephosphorylation of GluA1 at S845, reducing the 
extrasynaptic pool of GluA1‑containing CP‑AMPARs, which then undergo lysosomal degradation.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE   VOLUME 17 | JUNE 2016 | 343
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
CI-AMPAR
Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
CP-AMPAR
GRIP1
NSF
PICK1Repetitive 
synaptic 
activity
Constitutive 
AMPAR recycling
The PDZ domain-containing protein PICK1 inter -
acts with the GluA2 and GluA3 subunits through their 
C-terminal PDZ ligands 91. Early studies showed that 
PICK1 overexpression increases synaptic CP-AMPARs 
and blocks LTP at CA3–CA1 synapses92. By contrast, a 
subsequent study reported that PICK1 had no role in 
hippocampal LTP , instead suggesting that it is involved 
in AMPAR recycling93 and LTD through the promotion 
of intracellular retention of internalized AMPARs 94. 
However, these discrepancies may be explained, at 
least in part, by the requirement of PICK1 in LTP being 
dependent on the developmental stage and the induction 
protocol used95. Furthermore, as LTP relies on the recy-
cling of synaptic AMPARs96, the effects of PICK1 on LTP 
may be via the regulation of GluA2 recycling. Indeed, 
by using glycine-induced LTP in neuronal cultures as 
a model system, it has been proposed that PICK1 can 
specifically restrict the recycling of GluA2 -containing 
CI-AMPARs upon LTP induction, thereby pro -
moting the switch to synaptic GluA1 -homomeric 
CP-AMPARs50. As GluA1 insertion is required for LTP16, 
this mechanism of restricting GluA2 recycling is prob-
ably additive to interactions with GluA1 that promote 
synaptic incorporation of this subunit during LTP .
The direct role of GluA1 interactors in promoting 
the synaptic incorporation of CP -AMPARs is mostly 
unclear. Indeed, although early studies reported the 
requirement for the GluA1 PDZ ligand in mediating 
the insertion of GluA1 -containing AMPARs during 
LTP16, this observation has been called into question 
by the generation of knock -in mice lacking the final 
seven C-terminal residues of GluA1, including the PDZ 
ligand20. At CA1 hippocampal synapses, the localiza -
tion of GluA1 was unchanged, and LTP and LTD were 
not altered by the deletion of the GluA1 PDZ ligand. 
Furthermore, high-resolution imaging has determined 
that the synaptic mobility and the distribution of GluA1 
do not require its PDZ ligand 21,33. Therefore, it seems 
that direct PDZ interactions with the GluA1 cytoplas -
mic tail are not required for synaptic plasticity. Rather, 
the predominant interaction facilitating GluA1 synap-
tic recruitment and retention during LTP is mediated 
through TARP binding to PSD95 (REFS 30,33,97). More 
specifically, CaMKII-meditated phosphorylation of 
stargazin enhances its binding to PSD95, to promote 
synaptic retention of GluA1 -containing AMPARs33,98, 
consistent with the preferential insertion of GluA1 dur-
ing LTP . However, how this occurs is unclear given that 
stargazin binds to all AMPAR subunits31. Thus, although 
direct PDZ interactions with the C -terminal ligand 
of GluA1 are not absolutely required for LTP , they are 
likely to have a key modulatory role during synaptic 
delivery of GluA1 -containing AMPARs during LTP99. 
For example, the GluA1 PDZ ligand binds selectively 
to synapse-associated protein 97 (SAP97; also known as 
DLG1), which delivers GluA1-containing AMPARs to 
synapses following CaMKII activation via binding to the 
motor protein myosin VI100,101. Furthermore, the endo-
somal PDZ domain-containing protein sorting nexin 27 
(SNX27) binds to both GluA1 and GluA2 and is involved 
both in maintaining basal AMPAR surface expression 
and in mediating AMPAR insertion during LTP102,103.
Plasticity at the cerebellar granule cell–stellate cell 
synapse is characterized by the replacement of syn -
aptic CP-AMPARs with CI -AMPARs (FIG. 5). Despite 
this process being the reverse of that observed dur -
ing hippo  campal LTP , PICK1 is also required for 
this form of plasticity 104,105. In contrast to its pro -
posed role in restricting the surface expression of 
GluA2-containing AMPARs during hippocampal LTP , 
PICK1 promotes the CP-AMPAR to CI-AMPAR switch 
in stellate cells by supporting an extrasynaptic pool 
of GluA2 -containing receptors, although the molec -
ular mechanisms underlying this effect are unclear. 
Furthermore, another PDZ domain-containing protein, 
glutamate receptor-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1), has 
also been implicated in this process. GRIP1 is thought 
to anchor AMPARs at synapses106. Peptides that block 
the GRIP1–GluA2 or GRIP1–GluA3 interaction dest -
abilize GluA2 -lacking CP -AMPARs at synapses, and 
Figure 5 | CP‑AMPAR plasticity at cerebellar granule cell–stellate cell synapses. Unusually, in cerebellar stellate cells, 
postsynaptic AMPA receptors (AMPARs) are primarily calcium‑permeable GluA3 homomers, which are anchored at 
synapses through interactions with glutamate receptor‑interacting protein 1 (GRIP1). By contrast, extrasynaptic AMPARs 
are calcium impermeable. However, repetitive synaptic activity induces a switch in synaptic AMPARs from calcium 
permeable to calcium impermeable through uncoupling of the Ca2+‑permeable AMPARs (CP‑AMPARs) from GRIP1, 
resulting in the diffusion of the CP‑AMPARs from the synapse, and their replacement by extrasynaptic Ca2+‑impermeable 
AMPARs (CI‑AMPARs). Protein interacting with C kinase 1 (PICK1) and N‑ethylmaleimide sensitive factor (NSF) are also 
thought to have a role in this switch, through supplying extrasynaptic CI‑AMPARs and stabilizing surface‑expressed 
CI‑AMPARs, respectively.
REVIEWS
344 | JUNE 2016 | VOLUME 17  www.nature.com/nrn
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
synaptic activity reduces the interaction of GRIP1 with 
CP-AMPARs104. Given that synaptic CP-AMPARs in stel-
late cells have been suggested to be GluA3 homomers45, 
this implies specific regulation of the interaction of 
GRIP1 with GluA2 versus GluA3, and further work will 
be required to define how this is achieved.
The multimeric ATPase N-ethylmaleimide sensitive 
factor (NSF) has also been implicated in stellate cell plas-
ticity105. NSF interacts with GluA2, and blockade of the 
GluA2–NSF interaction results in a rapid run-down in 
AMPAR EPSCs, supporting a role for NSF in the consti-
tutive cycling of GluA2-containing AMPARs107. In stel-
late cells, blocking the GluA2–NSF interaction did not 
affect the extrasynaptic pool of GluA2, but it did prevent 
the activity-dependent switch between CP-AMPARs 
and CI-AMPARs. These data suggest that NSF is spe -
cifically required for the synaptic incorporation of 
GluA2-containing receptors but, again, the underlying 
molecular mechanisms remain to be determined.
AMPAR auxiliary subunits.  The discovery of multi -
ple auxiliary subunits with overlapping roles has greatly 
extended our understanding of the diversity of AMPAR 
macromolecular complexes (reviewed in REFS 32,108,109). 
Currently identified AMPAR auxiliary subunits include 
TARPs, suppressor of lurcher (SOL)110, cornichon homo-
logues (CNIHs) 111, synapse differentiation-induced 
genes (SYNDIG1 and SYNDIG4) 112,113, the cysteine-
knot AMPAR modulating protein family114,115 and germ 
cell-specific gene 1-like (GSG1L)116. Of these, the proto-
typical TARP family of AMPAR auxiliary subunits are by 
far the best characterized.
There are seven TARPs, stargazin and γ3–8 (for a 
review, see REF. 108). A large body of work has demon-
strated that stargazin, and other type I TARPs (γ3, γ4 and 
γ8), can promote synaptic trapping of AMPARs through 
binding to PSD95 and, as discussed above, this inter -
action offers an attractive mechanism for how AMPARs 
are recruited and accumulated at the postsynapse during 
LTP33,98. Furthermore, dynamic AMPAR–TARP inter-
actions have also been recently demonstrated to underlie 
the ability of AMPARs to support high-frequency stim-
ulation despite undergoing desensitization117. A general 
consensus is that agonist binding reduces AMPAR affin-
ity for stargazin98,117,118 (but see REFS 119,120), allowing 
AMPARs to diffuse away from the synaptically anchored 
stargazin. This loss of desensitized AMPARs from the 
PSD frees up ‘slots’ for non-desensitized AMPARs, 
which maintains synaptic transmission 117. Thus, in 
addition to their well-characterized role in determining 
the biophysical properties of AMPARs, TARPs have a 
key role in synaptic AMPAR retention under basal and 
activity-dependent conditions.
Beyond the synaptic trapping of AMPARs, the TARPs 
stargazin and γ5 directly reduce the polyamine sensitiv-
ity of CP-AMPARs121,122. Because polyamine block is a 
parameter that is used to determine the GluA2 content 
of the receptors, the presence or absence of TARPs can 
therefore complicate unambiguous determination of 
subunit content and necessitates careful consideration 
of the role of TARPs in the trafficking of CP-AMPARs 
versus CI -AMPARs. Nonetheless, in stargazer mice, 
there is a marked increase in the CP -AMPAR compo-
nent of synaptic responses in cerebellar stellate cells, 
indicating that, unlike CI -AMPARs, CP -AMPARs 
are synaptically expressed in the absence of stargazin. 
Consistent with the absence of stargazin, these synap -
tic CP-AMPARs exhibited low conductance and were 
blocked by spermine123 (but see REF. 124). In cerebellar 
granule cells, another TARP , γ7, promotes the surface 
expression of CP -AMPARs while restricting the sur -
face expression of CI-AMPARs125. Interestingly, however, 
neither γ7-associated CP-AMPARs nor CI-AMPARs are 
synaptically expressed unless the complex also contains 
stargazin. Thus, although the role of TARP association 
in the plasticity of CP-AMPARs has not been fully elu-
cidated, it is clear that TARP association can promote 
the trafficking of CP-AMPARs versus CI-AMPARs and 
that the levels and properties of synaptic AMPARs are 
intricately controlled by association with TARPs.
Given the expanding range of AMPAR auxiliary sub-
units32,109, and the discovery that cornichon proteins can 
determine the subunit composition of synaptic AMPARs 
by promoting the incorporation of GluA1 -containing 
receptors126, an important question for future work will 
be to examine how these newly discovered proteins 
coordinate the properties and synaptic incorporation 
of CP-AMPARs versus CI-AMPARs. Indeed, even for 
TARPs and cornichons, many of the specific mechan -
isms of action remain to be determined, and how the 
effects of the different auxiliary subunits summate or 
occlude each other is entirely unknown. Thus, defining 
how, where and when AMPAR auxiliary subunits assem-
ble with AMPARs and how they interact and/or compete 
is likely to be a fruitful avenue for future research.
AMPAR phosphorylation. The kinases and phosphoryl-
ation sites on different AMPAR subunits, and their roles 
in receptor trafficking, plasticity and function have been 
intensively studied and extensively reviewed (for recent 
reviews see REFS 6,127,128).
CaMKII, protein kinase A (PKA) and PKC are all crit-
ical modulators of LTP and LTD. In general, increased 
phosphorylation leads to LTP and decreased phosphoryl-
ation leads to LTD 129,130. CaMKII and PKC can phos -
phorylate the GluA1 subunit at S831 (REF. 131), which 
increases the conductance of homomeric GluA1 and 
GluA1–GluA2 heteromers in the presence of TARPs132, 
and PKA phosphorylates GluA1 at S845, increasing the 
peak conductance and open probability of the channel133. 
Knock-in mice expressing GluA1 or GluA2 subunits 
with mutated non-phosphorylatable or phosphomimetic 
residues have demonstrated that the phosphorylation of 
GluA1 by CaMKII or PKA is necessary for full hippo -
campal LTP expression 134, and dephosphorylation of 
the PKA site in GluA1 is required for LTD46. Furthermore, 
PKC-mediated phosphorylation of GluA2 is required 
for cerebellar LTD 135. Beyond GluA1 and GluA2, the 
transient expression of GluA4 in CA1 pyramidal neu -
rons during early development underpins the switch 
in kinase signalling in LTP from PKA- to CaMKII-
dependent mechanisms136. PKA activation drives synaptic 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE   VOLUME 17 | JUNE 2016 | 345
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
AKAP150
(Also known as AKAP79 in 
humans). A specialized scaffold 
protein that can bring together 
protein kinase A (PKA), PKC, 
the scaffolding proteins 
synapse-associated protein 97 
(SAP97) and postsynaptic 
density protein 95 (PSD95) 
and the Ca2+-dependent 
protein phosphatase 
calcineurin with AMPA 
receptors at synapses.
expression of GluA4, and PKA-mediated recruitment 
of GluA4-containing AMPARs to immature synapses 
unsilences silent synapses136.
Surprisingly, a recent analysis of the stoichiometry of 
GluA1 phosphorylation using Phos-tag SDS–PAGE has 
indicated that only ~1% of total GluA1 is phosphorylated 
at S831 and that less than 0.1% is phosphorylated at S845. 
The estimated number of GluA1-containing AMPARs 
at a given synapse is ~100, so, on average, very few syn-
apses will contain any GluA1 phosphorylated at either 
S831 or S845. No GluA1 simultaneously phosphorylated 
at both S831 and S845 was detected 22. The fraction of 
GluA1 phosphorylated at these residues was increased 
by activity, but it still remained extremely low, leading the 
authors to question whether this level of phosphorylation 
can support its proposed role in AMPAR trafficking.
These results are puzzling as synaptic plasticity 
is impaired in non-phosphorylatable S831A/S845A 
knock-in mutant GluA1 mice 23. The authors propose 
one possible explanation that suggests that the phos -
phorylation of a very small proportion of GluA1 might 
trigger changes in adjacent unphosphorylated AMPARs 
by an unknown mechanism. Although further work 
is required, it is notable that, owing to their dynamic 
nature, other post-translational modifications such as 
ubiquitylation and sumoylation affect only a very small 
proportion of substrate at any one time while still having 
a major effect on the substrate pool137.
Notwithstanding the results of the Phos-tag study22, 
many reports have examined how phosphorylation dif-
ferentially traffics CP-AMPARs versus CI-AMPARs, and 
accumulating evidence points to PKA-mediated phos-
phorylation of S845 in GluA1 as an important determi-
nant in GluA1 -containing CP-AMPAR trafficking in 
hippocampal LTP , LTD and homeostatic scaling (FIG. 4). 
During hippocampal LTP , it has been proposed that 
CP-AMPARs are first inserted at extrasynaptic sites and 
then incorporated into synapses by lateral diffusion in 
the membrane49. He et al.51 observed a pool of extrasyn-
aptic CP-AMPARs in CA1 neurons that was absent in 
neurons from mice in which GluA1 S845 was mutated 
to a non-phosphorylatable alanine. This loss was 
attributed to the lysosomal degradation of homomeric 
GluA1 receptors, and supports a model by which PKA-
mediated phosphorylation of GluA1 stabilizes extra -
synaptic GluA1 homomers, potentially priming them 
for synaptic incorporation during LTP . Although the 
authors did not examine LTP directly, they did observe 
that the dephosphorylation of GluA1 S845 was associ-
ated with NMDAR-dependent LTD, suggesting that the 
removal of CP-AMPARs contributes to this form of LTD, 
and that the phosphorylation state of GluA1 S845 may 
control the supply of extrasynaptic CP -AMPARs for 
bidirectional synaptic plasticity51.
GluA1 S845 is dephosphorylated by the calcium-  
dependent phosphatase calcineurin (also known as 
PP2B). Calcineurin and PKA are anchored at synapses 
by the protein AKAP150  (the rodent orthologue of 
human AKAP79), and knock in of an AKAP150 mutant 
defective in calcineurin binding leads to enhanced 
GluA1 S845 phosphorylation and increases synaptic 
expression of CP-AMPARs138. Consistent with increased 
GluA1 S845 phosphorylation, these mice do not exhibit 
LTD at CA3–CA1 synapses but show enhanced LTP138.
A role for GluA1 S845 phosphorylation has also been 
proposed in the synaptic incorporation of CP-AMPARs 
during synaptic scaling. Cultures from knock -in mice 
harbouring the non-phosphorylatable S845A muta -
tion139 do not undergo tetrodotoxin (TTX)-induced 
synaptic upscaling. Moreover, TTX reduces calci neurin 
activity and upregulates phosphorylation of GluA1 
S845, and inhibition of calcineurin mimics upscaling 
in the absence of TTX 139. Consistent with this, dur -
ing TTX-induced scaling, active PKA is enriched at 
synapses to mediate the phosphorylation of GluA1 
S845, and this process also requires the involvement of 
AKAP150 (REF. 140). Together, these data highlight the 
critical importance of GluA1 S845 phosphorylation in 
controlling the availability of synaptic CP-AMPARs.
Intriguingly, although it does not directly phosphoryl-
ate AMPAR subunits, CaMKI has also been implicated 
in CP-AMPAR expression during hippocampal LTP141. 
The infusion of active CaMKI potentiates AMPARs in 
cultured neurons through the synaptic incorporation of 
CP-AMPARs, in a manner that requires actin polymeri-
zation. Furthermore, in slices, CA3–CA1 LTP induced by 
theta-burst stimulation recruited CP-AMPARs, and this 
was prevented by the inhibition of CaMKK, an upstream 
activator of CaMKI141. However, the targets of CaMKI 
that mediate the synaptic expression of CP -AMPARs 
have not yet been identified.
AMPAR subunits and disease
Because of the paramount importance of correctly regu-
lated AMPAR synaptic expression, almost any defect in 
the processes that control their trafficking or activity can 
have dire consequences on brain function. Indeed, most 
neurological and neurodegenerative disorders involve 
synaptic malfunction that can be linked to abnormali-
ties in AMPARs142. For example, one of the earliest cell 
biological manifestations of dementia in Alzheimer dis-
ease (AD) is reduced synaptic AMPARs, and aberrations 
in LTP and LTD143. Furthermore, disruption of AMPAR 
trafficking by soluble amyloid-β (Aβ) oligomers is a 
major causative agent of synaptic dysfunction in AD144. 
More specifically, it has been reported that Aβ oligomers 
bind in close proximity to GluA2-containing complexes 
and that AMPAR antagonists inhibit Aβ oligomer bind-
ing and synaptic loss, raising the possibility that Aβ 
may affect AMPAR trafficking by binding directly to 
the GluA2 protein complex145. Conversely, intracellular 
application of oligomerized Aβ causes an acute increase 
in AMPAR-mediated synaptic responses, which requires 
PKA-mediated phosphorylation of S845 in GluA1. 
Ablation of GluA1, but not of GluA2, prevents this 
increase, which is consistent with intracellular Aβ caus-
ing an enhancement of synaptic CP-AMPAR number and 
consequent excitotoxicity146.
The selective loss of GluA2-containing AMPARs and 
the subsequent increase in intracellular Ca2+ owing to the 
expression of CP-AMPARs are implicated in the pathol-
ogy of many other diseases. Prolonged decreases in surface 
REVIEWS
346 | JUNE 2016 | VOLUME 17  www.nature.com/nrn
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
GluA2-containing AMPARs in vulnerable neurons medi-
ate a switch from CI-AMPARs to CP-AMPARs that is a 
causal factor in ischaemic neuronal death (for a review, see 
REF. 91). A similar mechanism has also been proposed for 
synaptic dysfunction and neuronal death after traumatic 
brain injury147. Furthermore, neurons that are subject to 
epileptic seizures markedly downregulate GluA2 mRNA 
and subunit expression148. Interestingly, in addition to 
disease mechanisms arising from CP-AMPARs that lack 
GluA2, dysfunctional Q/R editing in GluA2 occurs in 
the motor neurons of patients with amyotrophic lateral 
scler osis (ALS), which is caused by the reduced expression 
of the ADAR2 (also known as ADARB1) RNA-editing 
enzyme, indicating a link between the expression of 
CP-AMPARs that contain unedited GluA2 and neuronal 
death in ALS149. Together, these studies highlight the bal-
ance between CP-AMPARs and CI-AMPARs as a crucial 
determinant of neuronal fate and, although much remains 
to be learned, raise the potential for the modulation of this 
pathway as a possible strategy for therapeutic intervention 
in a number of disease states.
Current position and pressing questions
The dynamic regulation of AMPAR subunit composi-
tion is a crucial factor in neuronal vulnerability to stress 
and, more controversially, may represent a core mecha-
nism underlying physiological forms of plasticity induc-
tion. Most attention has focused on the GluA2 subunit 
because it has profound effects on AMPAR assembly, 
trafficking and the ability of the channel to gate Ca 2+. 
Moreover, in general terms, the dysregulation of GluA2 
incorporation into AMPAR complexes has been strongly 
implicated in neuronal damage and disease.
A widely accepted model is that AMPAR trafficking 
and surface expression are governed by a strictly hier -
archical series of rules that is dictated by interactions 
with the composite subunits. In this system, long-tailed 
GluA1 subunits dominate in heteromeric receptor 
complexes undergoing activity-dependent trafficking 
processes and, under basal conditions, endocytosis 
and recycling of AMPARs are regulated by interactions 
with the short-tailed GluA2 subunit. This dogma has 
recently been questioned by results that seem to indi -
cate that, although the subunit composition of AMPARs 
can influence trafficking and synaptic expression, it is 
not fundamental to these processes. These intriguing 
findings challenge core concepts and certainly warrant 
a re-analysis and re-evaluation of the field. In particular, 
it will be important to determine under what physiolog-
ical conditions activity-dependent AMPAR trafficking 
can occur independently of subunit composition and, 
when this occurs, how the incorporated receptors are 
recruited and stabilized at the synapse. A major focus 
will be on the identification of place-holder proteins that 
can capture, retain and promote surface expression of 
the wide array of glutamate receptors that can support 
LTP under these conditions.
An emerging theory for the synaptic retention of 
AMPARs is the binding of TARPs to PSD95; how -
ever, it is unclear how this mechanism supports the 
subunit-specific trafficking of AMPARs that is observed 
during plasticity. Nonetheless, the realization that 
AMPAR auxiliary proteins also function as interaction 
platforms to expand the range of AMPAR-interacting 
proteins clearly warrants further investigation to iden-
tify and characterize new protein partners. These find-
ings also demonstrate that the subunit composition 
and assembly of AMPARs extends far beyond just the 
pore-forming subunits. Analysis of the stoichiometry 
and competition between different auxiliary proteins 
that are present in different receptor complexes will 
open new and potentially exciting avenues of inves -
tigation that will provide a molecular basis for the 
extraordinary flexibility of neurons to adapt synaptic 
transmission in response to activity.
Although neurons may be able to support LTP in 
a subunit- and receptor subtype-independent man -
ner under some conditions, it is clear from a wealth of 
studies that, under most experimental conditions, the 
subunit-specific rules of AMPAR trafficking prevail. 
However, many questions remain, even for this estab -
lished model, particularly with respect to the differen-
tial trafficking of CP-AMPARs versus CI -AMPARs. 
Although it remains controversial, mounting evidence 
supports a role for specific trafficking of CP-AMPARs 
in forms of plasticity both in vitro and in vivo. We 
expect that standardization of the precise experimental 
conditions and developmental stages used should rec-
oncile these controversies. Nonetheless, the signalling 
pathways, interacting proteins and post-translational 
modifications that mediate the specific trafficking of 
CP-AMPARs versus CI -AMPARs remain mostly un -
defined. More generally, how the subunit composition 
of AMPARs is rapidly regulated at individual synapses 
also remains enigmatic. For example, are there reserves 
of AMPARs assembled from different combinations of 
subunits that are available for insertion into the mem-
brane under appropriate conditions and, if so, how are 
these complexes selected? How is the subunit compo -
sition of locally synthesized receptors controlled, and 
what signals promote their synaptic incorporation? 
Further insight into the signalling pathways and molec-
ular determinants underlying these local events will be 
crucial to better understand neuronal function. Finally, 
the involvement of dysregulated CP-AMPAR traffick-
ing in disease is intriguing, and offers the exciting pos-
sibility that these receptors may constitute a druggable 
target in a number of disorders of the nervous system. 
We anticipate that these questions will receive much 
attention in the coming years.
In conclusion, over the past three decades there 
have been impressive advances in our understanding 
of how AMPAR trafficking underpins synaptic func -
tion. Despite this progress, however, many funda -
mental questions remain, and the selective regulation 
of individual AMPAR subunits and the functional 
and pathological roles of CP -AMPARs are important 
themes for future study. Answering these questions will 
reveal in ever-greater detail the complex mechanistic 
processes that underlie brain function and provide new 
insights and new strategies to combat psychiatric and 
neurodegenerative diseases.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE   VOLUME 17 | JUNE 2016 | 347
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
1. Wisden, W. & Seeburg, P . H. Mammalian ionotropic 
glutamate receptors. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 3,  
291–298 (1993).
2. Mammen, A. L., Huganir, R. L. & O’Brien, R. J. 
Redistribution and stabilization of cell surface 
glutamate receptors during synapse formation. 
J. Neurosci. 17, 7351–7358 (1997).
3. Archibald, K., Perry, M. J., Molnar, E. & Henley, J. M. 
Surface expression and metabolic half-life of AMPA 
receptors in cultured rat cerebellar granule cells. 
Neuropharmacology 37, 1345–1353 (1998).
4. Henley, J. M., Barker, E. A. & Glebov, O. O. Routes, 
destinations and delays: recent advances in AMPA 
receptor trafficking. T rends Neurosci. 34, 258–268 
(2011).
5. Huganir, R. L. & Nicoll, R. A. AMPARs and synaptic 
plasticity: the last 25 years. Neuron 80, 704–717 
(2013).
6. Nicoll, R. A. & Roche, K. W. Long-term potentiation: 
peeling the onion. Neuropharmacology 74, 18–22 
(2013).
7. Sans, N. et al. Aberrant formation of glutamate 
receptor complexes in hippocampal neurons of mice 
lacking the GluR2 AMPA receptor subunit. 
J. Neurosci. 23, 9367–9373 (2003).
8. Lu, W. et al. Subunit composition of synaptic 
AMPA receptors revealed by a single-cell genetic 
approach. Neuron 62, 254–268 (2009).
9. Wenthold, R. J., Petralia, R. S., Blahos, J. II & 
Niedzielski, A. S. Evidence for multiple AMPA 
receptor complexes in hippocampal CA1/CA2 
neurons. J. Neurosci. 16, 1982–1989 (1996).
10. Shi, S., Hayashi, Y., Esteban, J. A. & Malinow, R. 
Subunit-specific rules governing AMPA receptor 
trafficking to synapses in hippocampal pyramidal 
neurons. Cell 105, 331–343 (2001).
This paper proposed the now widely accepted 
model that regulated addition of GluA1–
GluA2‑and continuous replacement of GluA2–
GluA3‑containing synaptic AMPARs provides the 
mechanism for how surface receptor number is 
established and maintained.
11. Kessels, H. W., Kopec, C. D., Klein, M. E. 
& Malinow, R. Roles of stargazin and 
phosphorylation in the control of AMPA 
receptor subcellular distribution. Nat. Neurosci. 
12, 888–896 (2009).
12. Zhu, J. J., Esteban, J. A., Hayashi, Y. & Malinow, R. 
Postnatal synaptic potentiation: delivery of 
GluR4-containing AMPA receptors by spontaneous 
activity. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 1098–1106 (2000).
13. Bernard, V., Somogyi, P . & Bolam, J. P . Cellular, 
subcellular, and subsynaptic distribution of AMPA-
type glutamate receptor subunits in the neostriatum 
of the rat. J. Neurosci. 17, 819–833 (1997).
14. Pelkey, K. A. et al. Pentraxins coordinate excitatory 
synapse maturation and circuit integration of 
parvalbumin interneurons. Neuron 85, 1257–1272 
(2015).
15. Zamanillo, D. et al. Importance of AMPA receptors 
for hippocampal synaptic plasticity but not for spatial 
learning. Science 284, 1805–1811 (1999).
16. Hayashi, Y. et al. Driving AMPA receptors into synapses 
by LTP and CaMKII: requirement for GluR1 and 
PDZ domain interaction. Science 287, 2262–2267 
(2000).
17. Lee, S. H., Simonetta, A. & Sheng, M. Subunit rules 
governing the sorting of internalized AMPA receptors 
in hippocampal neurons. Neuron 43, 221–236 
(2004).
18. Granger, A. J., Shi, Y., Lu, W., Cerpas, M. & 
Nicoll, R. A. LTP requires a reserve pool of glutamate 
receptors independent of subunit type. Nature 493, 
495–500 (2013).
Contrary to the prevailing view, this paper 
reported the unexpected finding that there is no 
absolute requirement for any individual AMPAR 
subunit, or C‑terminal protein interaction, for LTP.
19. Granger, A. J. & Nicoll, R. A. LTD expression is 
independent of glutamate receptor subtype. 
Front. Synapt. Neurosci. 6, 15 (2014).
20. Kim, C. H. et al. Persistent hippocampal 
CA1 LTP in mice lacking the C-terminal PDZ 
ligand of GluR1. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 985–987  
(2005).
21. Kerr, J. M. & Blanpied, T . A. Subsynaptic AMPA 
receptor distribution is acutely regulated by actin-
driven reorganization of the postsynaptic density. 
J. Neurosci. 32, 658–673 (2012).
22. Hosokawa, T ., Mitsushima, D., Kaneko, R. & 
Hayashi, Y. Stoichiometry and phosphoisotypes 
of hippocampal AMPA-type glutamate receptor 
phosphorylation. Neuron 85, 60–67 (2015).
Using biochemical approaches, this report 
suggests that there is almost no phosphorylation 
of GluA1 at S831 and S845, the two major sites 
identified by many previous papers as critical for 
AMPAR regulation.
23. Lee, H. K. et al. Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor 
GluR1 subunit is required for synaptic plasticity 
and retention of spatial memory. Cell 112, 631–643 
(2003).
This study generated transgenic mice that 
express GluA1 with mutated phosphorylation 
sites and demonstrated that phosphorylation of 
GluA1 is required for LTD and LTP, and learning 
and memory.
24. Esteban, J. A. et al. PKA phosphorylation of AMPA 
receptor subunits controls synaptic trafficking 
underlying plasticity. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 136–143 
(2003).
25. MacGillavry, H. D., Song, Y., Raghavachari, S. & 
Blanpied, T . A. Nanoscale scaffolding domains 
within the postsynaptic density concentrate 
synaptic AMPA receptors. Neuron 78, 615–622 
(2013).
26. Nair, D. et al. Super-resolution imaging reveals that 
AMPA receptors inside synapses are dynamically 
organized in nanodomains regulated by PSD95. 
J. Neurosci. 33, 13204–13224 (2013).
27. Sheng, M. & Hoogenraad, C. C. The postsynaptic 
architecture of excitatory synapses: a more 
quantitative view. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76, 823–847 
(2007).
28. Steiner, P . et al. Destabilization of the postsynaptic 
density by PSD-95 serine 73 phosphorylation inhibits 
spine growth and synaptic plasticity. Neuron 60,  
788–802 (2008).
29. Coombs, I. D. & Cull-Candy, S. G. T ransmembrane 
AMPA receptor regulatory proteins and AMPA 
receptor function in the cerebellum. Neuroscience 
162, 656–665 (2009).
30. Bats, C., Groc, L. & Choquet, D. The interaction 
between Stargazin and PSD-95 regulates AMPA 
receptor surface trafficking. Neuron 53, 719–734 
(2007).
31. Chen, L. et al. Stargazing regulates synaptic targeting 
of AMPA receptors by two distinct mechanisms. 
Nature 408, 936–943 (2000).
This paper reports that AMPAR subunit 
interaction with stargazin is required for surface 
expression of AMPARs and implies the widespread 
influence of TARPs in AMPAR trafficking.
32. Sumioka, A. Auxiliary subunits provide new insights 
into regulation of AMPA receptor trafficking. 
J. Biochem. 153, 331–337 (2013).
33. Opazo, P . et al. CaMKII triggers the diffusional 
trapping of surface AMPARs through phosphorylation 
of stargazin. Neuron 67, 239–252 (2010).
34. Opazo, P ., Sainlos, M. & Choquet, D. Regulation of 
AMPA receptor surface diffusion by PSD-95 slots. 
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 22, 453–460 (2012).
35. Carta, M. et al. CaMKII-dependent phosphorylation of 
GluK5 mediates plasticity of kainate receptors. EMBO J. 
32, 496–510 (2013).
36. Saglietti, L. et al. Extracellular interactions between 
GluR2 and N-cadherin in spine regulation. Neuron 54, 
461–477 (2007).
37. T ai, C. Y., Kim, S. A. & Schuman, E. M. Cadherins and 
synaptic plasticity. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 20, 567–575 
(2008).
38. Linhoff, M. W. et al. An unbiased expression screen for 
synaptogenic proteins identifies the LRRTM protein 
family as synaptic organizers. Neuron 61, 734–749 
(2009).
39. Soler-Llavina, G. J. et al. Leucine-rich repeat 
transmembrane proteins are essential for 
maintenance of long-term potentiation. Neuron 79, 
439–446 (2013).
This study shows that LRRTM synaptic cell 
adhesion molecules are required for LTP because 
they maintain the surface expression of newly 
recruited synaptic AMPARs.
40. Makino, H. & Malinow, R. AMPA receptor 
incorporation into synapses during LTP: the role of 
lateral movement and exocytosis. Neuron 64,  
381–390 (2009).
41. Kawahara, Y., Ito, K., Sun, H., Kanazawa, I. & Kwak, S. 
Low editing efficiency of GluR2 mRNA is associated 
with a low relative abundance of ADAR2 mRNA in 
white matter of normal human brain. Eur. J. Neurosci. 
18, 23–33 (2003).
42. Wright, A. & Vissel, B. The essential role of AMPA 
receptor GluR2 subunit RNA editing in the normal and 
diseased brain. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 5, 34 (2012).
43. Isaac, J. T ., Ashby, M. & McBain, C. J. The role of the 
GluR2 subunit in AMPA receptor function and synaptic 
plasticity. Neuron 54, 859–871 (2007).
44. Liu, S. J. & Zukin, R. S. Ca2+-permeable AMPA 
receptors in synaptic plasticity and neuronal death. 
T rends Neurosci. 30, 126–134 (2007).
45. Cull-Candy, S., Kelly, L. & Farrant, M. Regulation of 
Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors: synaptic plasticity 
and beyond. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 16, 288–297 
(2006).
46. Man, H. Y. GluA2-lacking, calcium-permeable AMPA 
receptors — inducers of plasticity? Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 
21, 291–298 (2011).
47. Washburn, M. S. & Dingledine, R. Block of alpha-amino
-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) 
receptors by polyamines and polyamine toxins. 
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 278, 669–678 (1996).
48. Plant, K. et al. T ransient incorporation of native 
GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors during hippocampal 
long-term potentiation. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 602–604 
(2006).
49. Yang, Y., Wang, X. B. & Zhou, Q. Perisynaptic 
GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors control the reversibility 
of synaptic and spines modifications. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 107, 11999–12004 (2010).
50. Jaafari, N., Henley, J. M. & Hanley, J. G. PICK1 
mediates transient synaptic expression of 
GluA2-lacking AMPA receptors during glycine-induced 
AMPA receptor trafficking. J. Neurosci. 32,  
11618–11630 (2012).
51. He, K. et al. Stabilization of Ca2+-permeable AMPA 
receptors at perisynaptic sites by GluR1-S845 
phosphorylation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 
20033–20038 (2009).
52. Fortin, D. A. et al. Long-term potentiation-dependent 
spine enlargement requires synaptic Ca2+-permeable 
AMPA receptors recruited by CaM-kinase I. J. Neurosci. 
30, 11565–11575 (2010).
53. Adesnik, H. & Nicoll, R. A. Conservation of glutamate 
receptor 2-containing AMPA receptors during long-
term potentiation. J. Neurosci. 27, 4598–4602 
(2007).
54. Gray, E. E., Fink, A. E., Sarinana, J., Vissel, B. & 
O’Dell, T . J. Long-term potentiation in the 
hippocampal CA1 region does not require insertion 
and activation of GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors. 
J. Neurophysiol. 98, 2488–2492 (2007).
55. Granger, A. J. & Nicoll, R. A. Expression mechanisms 
underlying long-term potentiation: a postsynaptic 
view, 10 years on. Phil. T rans. R. Soc. B 369, 20130136 
(2014).
56. Ho, M. T . et al. Developmental expression of Ca2+-
permeable AMPA receptors underlies depolarization-
induced long-term depression at mossy fiber CA3 
pyramid synapses. J. Neurosci. 27, 11651–11662 
(2007).
57. Liu, S. Q. & Cull-Candy, S. G. Synaptic activity at 
calcium-permeable AMPA receptors induces a switch 
in receptor subtype. Nature 405, 454–458 (2000).
This paper provided the first description of 
activity‑induced changes in the AMPAR subunit 
composition from GluA2‑lacking, Ca2+‑permeable 
to GluA2‑containing Ca2+‑impermeable complexes 
at cerebellar stellate cell synapses.
58. Kelly, L., Farrant, M. & Cull-Candy, S. G. Synaptic 
mGluR activation drives plasticity of calcium-
permeable AMPA receptors. Nat. Neurosci. 12,  
593–601 (2009).
59. T urrigiano, G. G. The self-tuning neuron: synaptic 
scaling of excitatory synapses. Cell 135, 422–435 
(2008).
60. Thiagarajan, T . C., Lindskog, M. & T sien, R. W. 
Adaptation to synaptic inactivity in hippocampal 
neurons. Neuron 47, 725–737 (2005).
61. Aoto, J., Nam, C. I., Poon, M. M., Ting, P . & Chen, L. 
Synaptic signaling by all-trans retinoic acid in 
homeostatic synaptic plasticity. Neuron 60, 308–320 
(2008).
62. Sutton, M. A. et al. Miniature neurotransmission 
stabilizes synaptic function via tonic suppression of 
local dendritic protein synthesis. Cell 125, 785–799 
(2006).
63. Ogoshi, F. et al. T umor necrosis-factor-alpha (TNF-α) 
induces rapid insertion of Ca2+-permeable α-amino-3-
hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionate (AMPA)/
kainate (Ca-A/K) channels in a subset of hippocampal 
pyramidal neurons. Exp. Neurol. 193, 384–393 
(2005).
REVIEWS
348 | JUNE 2016 | VOLUME 17  www.nature.com/nrn
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
64. Shepherd, J. D. et al. Arc/Arg3.1 mediates 
homeostatic synaptic scaling of AMPA receptors. 
Neuron 52, 475–484 (2006).
65. Gainey, M. A., Hurvitz-Wolff, J. R., Lambo, M. E. 
& T urrigiano, G. G. Synaptic scaling requires the 
GluR2 subunit of the AMPA receptor. J. Neurosci. 29, 
6479–6489 (2009).
66. Pellegrini-Giampietro, D. E., Bennett, M. V. & 
Zukin, R. S. Are Ca2+-permeable kainate/AMPA 
receptors more abundant in immature brain? 
Neurosci. Lett. 144, 65–69 (1992).
67. Pickard, L., Noel, J., Henley, J. M., Collingridge, G. L. 
& Molnar, E. Developmental changes in synaptic 
AMPA and NMDA receptor distribution and AMPA 
receptor subunit composition in living hippocampal 
neurons. J. Neurosci. 20, 7922–7931 (2000).
68. Monyer, H., Seeburg, P . H. & Wisden, W. Glutamate-
operated channels — developmentally early and 
mature forms arise by alternative splicing. Neuron 6, 
799–810 (1991).
69. Allen, N. J. Role of glia in developmental synapse 
formation. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 1027–1033 
(2013).
70. Suzuki, E., Kessler, M. & Arai, A. C. The fast kinetics of 
AMPA GluR3 receptors is selectively modulated by the 
TARPs γ4 and γ8. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 38, 117–123 
(2008).
71. Blair, M. G. et al. Developmental changes in 
structural and functional properties of hippocampal 
AMPARs parallels the emergence of deliberative 
spatial navigation in juvenile rats. J. Neurosci. 33, 
12218–12228 (2013).
72. Mayer, M. L. Glutamate receptors at atomic 
resolution. Nature 440, 456–462 (2006).
73. Sukumaran, M., Penn, A. C. & Greger, I. H. AMPA 
receptor assembly: atomic determinants and built-in 
modulators. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 970, 241–264 
(2012).
74. Nakagawa, T . The biochemistry, ultrastructure, and 
subunit assembly mechanism of AMPA receptors. 
Mol. Neurobiol. 42, 161–184 (2010).
75. Rossmann, M. et al. Subunit-selective N-terminal 
domain associations organize the formation of AMPA 
receptor heteromers. EMBO J. 30, 959–971 (2011).
76. Greger, I. H., Khatri, L. & Ziff, E. B. RNA editing at 
arg607 controls AMPA receptor exit from the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Neuron 34, 759–772 (2002).
77. Greger, I. H., Khatri, L., Kong, X. & Ziff, E. B. AMPA 
receptor tetramerization is mediated by Q/R editing. 
Neuron 40, 763–774 (2003).
78. Mah, S. J., Cornell, E., Mitchell, N. A. & Fleck, M. W. 
Glutamate receptor trafficking: endoplasmic reticulum 
quality control involves ligand binding and receptor 
function. J. Neurosci. 25, 2215–2225 (2005).
79. Greger, I. H., Ziff, E. B. & Penn, A. C. Molecular 
determinants of AMPA receptor subunit assembly. 
T rends Neurosci. 30, 407–416 (2007).
80. Brorson, J. R., Li, D. & Suzuki, T . Selective expression 
of heteromeric AMPA receptors driven by flip-flop 
differences. J. Neurosci. 24, 3461–3470 (2004).
81. Greger, I. H., Akamine, P ., Khatri, L. & Ziff, E. B. 
Developmentally regulated, combinatorial RNA 
processing modulates AMPA receptor biogenesis. 
Neuron 51, 85–97 (2006).
82. Kumar, S. S., Bacci, A., Kharazia, V. & 
Huguenard, J. R. A developmental switch of AMPA 
receptor subunits in neocortical pyramidal neurons. 
J. Neurosci. 22, 3005–3015 (2002).
83. Lu, W., Khatri, L. & Ziff, E. B. T rafficking of 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic 
acid receptor (AMPA) receptor subunit GluA2 from 
the endoplasmic reticulum is stimulated by a 
complex containing Ca2+/calmodulin-activated 
kinase II (CaMKII) and PICK1 protein and by release 
of Ca2+ from internal stores. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 
19218–19230 (2014).
84. T omita, S. et al. Functional studies and distribution 
define a family of transmembrane AMPA receptor 
regulatory proteins. J. Cell Biol. 161, 805–816 
(2003).
85. Vandenberghe, W., Nicoll, R. A. & Bredt, D. S. 
Interaction with the unfolded protein response reveals 
a role for stargazin in biosynthetic AMPA receptor 
transport. J. Neurosci. 25, 1095–1102 (2005).
86. T omita, S., Nicoll, R. A. & Bredt, D. S. PDZ protein 
interactions regulating glutamate receptor function 
and plasticity. J. Cell Biol. 153, F19–F24 (2001).
87. Bokel, C., Dass, S., Wilsch-Brauninger, M. & Roth, S. 
Drosophila Cornichon acts as cargo receptor for ER 
export of the TGFα-like growth factor Gurken. 
Development 133, 459–470 (2006).
88. Sauvageau, E. et al. CNIH4 interacts with newly 
synthesized GPCR and controls their export from the 
endoplasmic reticulum. T raffic 15, 383–400 (2014).
89. Brockie, P . J. et al. Cornichons control ER export of 
AMPA receptors to regulate synaptic excitability. 
Neuron 80, 129–142 (2013).
90. Harmel, N. et al. AMPA receptors commandeer an 
ancient cargo exporter for use as an auxiliary subunit 
for signaling. PLoS ONE 7, e30681 (2012).
91. Hanley, J. G. Subunit-specific trafficking mechanisms 
regulating the synaptic expression of Ca2+-permeable 
AMPA receptors. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 27, 14–22 
(2014).
92. T erashima, A. et al. An essential role for PICK1 in 
NMDA receptor-dependent bidirectional synaptic 
plasticity. Neuron 57, 872–882 (2008).
93. Lin, D. T . & Huganir, R. L. PICK1 and phosphorylation 
of the glutamate receptor 2 (GluR2) AMPA receptor 
subunit regulates GluR2 recycling after NMDA 
receptor-induced internalization. J. Neurosci. 27, 
13903–13908 (2007).
94. Citri, A. et al. Calcium binding to PICK1 is essential 
for the intracellular retention of AMPA receptors 
underlying long-term depression. J. Neurosci. 30, 
16437–16452 (2010).
95. Volk, L., Kim, C. H., T akamiya, K., Yu, Y. & 
Huganir, R. L. Developmental regulation of protein 
interacting with C kinase 1 (PICK1) function in 
hippocampal synaptic plasticity and learning. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 21784–21789 
(2010).
96. Petrini, E. M. et al. Endocytic trafficking and recycling 
maintain a pool of mobile surface AMPA receptors 
required for synaptic potentiation. Neuron 63, 
92–105 (2009).
97. Schnell, E. et al. Direct interactions between PSD-95 
and stargazin control synaptic AMPA receptor 
number. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 13902–13907 
(2002).
98. T omita, S. et al. Stargazin modulates AMPA receptor 
gating and trafficking by distinct domains. Nature 
435, 1052–1058 (2005).
99. Boehm, J., Ehrlich, I., Hsieh, H. & Malinow, R. 
T wo mutations preventing PDZ-protein interactions 
of GluR1 have opposite effects on synaptic plasticity. 
Learn. Mem. 13, 562–565 (2006).
100. Mauceri, D., Cattabeni, F., Di Luca, M. & Gardoni, F. 
Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II 
phosphorylation drives synapse-associated protein 97 
into spines. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 23813–23821 
(2004).
101. Wu, H., Nash, J. E., Zamorano, P . & Garner, C. C. 
Interaction of SAP97 with minus-end-directed actin 
motor myosin VI. Implications for AMPA receptor 
trafficking. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 30928–30934 
(2002).
102. Loo, L. S., T ang, N., Al-Haddawi, M., Dawe, G. S. 
& Hong, W. A role for sorting nexin 27 in AMPA 
receptor trafficking. Nat. Commun. 5, 3176 (2014).
103. Hussain, N. K., Diering, G. H., Sole, J., Anggono, V. 
& Huganir, R. L. Sorting Nexin 27 regulates basal and 
activity-dependent trafficking of AMPARs. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 111, 11840–11845 (2014).
104. Liu, S. J. & Cull-Candy, S. G. Subunit interaction with 
PICK and GRIP controls Ca2+ permeability of AMPARs 
at cerebellar synapses. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 768–775 
(2005).
105. Gardner, S. M. et al. Calcium-permeable AMPA 
receptor plasticity is mediated by subunit-specific 
interactions with PICK1 and NSF. Neuron 45,  
903–915 (2005).
106. Dong, H. et al. GRIP: a synaptic PDZ domain-
containing protein that interacts with AMPA receptors. 
Nature 386, 279–284 (1997).
107. Nishimune, A. et al. NSF binding to GluR2 regulates 
synaptic transmission. Neuron 21, 87–97 (1998).
108. Jackson, A. C. & Nicoll, R. A. The expanding social 
network of ionotropic glutamate receptors: TARPs and 
other transmembrane auxiliary subunits. Neuron 70, 
178–199 (2011).
109. Haering, S. C., T apken, D., Pahl, S. & Hollmann, M. 
Auxiliary subunits: shepherding AMPA receptors 
to the plasma membrane. Membranes (Basel) 4,  
469–490 (2014).
110. Zheng, Y. et al. SOL-1 is an auxiliary subunit that 
modulates the gating of GLR-1 glutamate receptors 
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
103, 1100–1105 (2006).
111. Schwenk, J. et al. Functional proteomics identify 
cornichon proteins as auxiliary subunits of AMPA 
receptors. Science 323, 1313–1319 (2009).
112. Kalashnikova, E. et al. SynDIG1: an activity-regulated, 
AMPA- receptor-interacting transmembrane protein 
that regulates excitatory synapse development. 
Neuron 65, 80–93 (2010).
113. Kirk, L. M. et al. Distribution of the SynDIG4/Proline 
rich transmembrane protein 1 in rat brain. J. Comp. 
Neurol. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cne.23945 (2015).
114. von Engelhardt, J. et al. CKAMP44: a brain-specific 
protein attenuating short-term synaptic plasticity in 
the dentate gyrus. Science 327, 1518–1522 (2010).
115. Farrow, P . et al. Auxiliary subunits of the CKAMP 
family differentially modulate AMPA receptor 
properties. eLife 4, e09693 (2015).
116. Shanks, N. F. et al. Differences in AMPA and kainate 
receptor interactomes facilitate identification of AMPA 
receptor auxiliary subunit GSG1L. Cell Rep. 1, 590–598 
(2012).
117. Constals, A. et al. Glutamate-induced AMPA receptor 
desensitization increases their mobility and modulates 
short-term plasticity through unbinding from Stargazin. 
Neuron 85, 787–803 (2015).
118. Morimoto-T omita, M. et al. Autoinactivation of 
neuronal AMPA receptors via glutamate-regulated 
TARP interaction. Neuron 61, 101–112 (2009).
119. Nakagawa, T ., Cheng, Y., Ramm, E., Sheng, M. & 
Walz, T . Structure and different conformational states 
of native AMPA receptor complexes. Nature 433, 
545–549 (2005).
120. Semenov, A., Moykkynen, T ., Coleman, S. K., 
Korpi, E. R. & Keinanen, K. Autoinactivation of the 
stargazin-AMPA receptor complex: subunit-
dependency and independence from physical 
dissociation. PLoS ONE 7, e49282 (2012).
121. Soto, D., Coombs, I. D., Kelly, L., Farrant, M. &  
Cull-Candy, S. G. Stargazin attenuates intracellular 
polyamine block of calcium-permeable AMPA 
receptors. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1260–1267 (2007).
122. Soto, D. et al. Selective regulation of long-form 
calcium-permeable AMPA receptors by an atypical 
TARP , γ-5. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 277–285 (2009).
123. Bats, C., Soto, D., Studniarczyk, D., Farrant, M.  
& Cull-Candy, S. G. Channel properties reveal differential 
expression of TARPed and TARPless AMPARs in 
stargazer neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 853–861 (2012).
124. Jackson, A. C. et al. Probing TARP modulation of 
AMPA receptor conductance with polyamine toxins. 
J. Neurosci. 31, 7511–7520 (2011).
125. Studniarczyk, D., Coombs, I., Cull-Candy, S. G. & 
Farrant, M. TARP γ-7 selectively enhances synaptic 
expression of calcium-permeable AMPARs. 
Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1266–1274 (2013).
126. Herring, B. E. et al. Cornichon proteins determine 
the subunit composition of synaptic AMPA receptors. 
Neuron 77, 1083–1096 (2013).
127. Chater, T . E. & Goda, Y. The role of AMPA receptors 
in postsynaptic mechanisms of synaptic plasticity. 
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8, 401 (2014).
128. Wang, J. Q. et al. Roles of subunit phosphorylation 
in regulating glutamate receptor function. 
Eur. J. Pharmacol. 728, 183–187 (2014).
129. Lee, H. K., Barbarosie, M., Kameyama, K., Bear, M. F. 
& Huganir, R. L. Regulation of distinct AMPA receptor 
phosphorylation sites during bidirectional synaptic 
plasticity. Nature 405, 955–959 (2000).
130. Lu, W. & Roche, K. W. Posttranslational regulation 
of AMPA receptor trafficking and function. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. 22, 470–479 (2012).
131. Roche, K. W., O’Brien, R. J., Mammen, A. L., 
Bernhardt, J. & Huganir, R. L. Characterization of 
multiple phosphorylation sites on the AMPA receptor 
GluR1 subunit. Neuron 16, 1179–1188 (1996).
132. Kristensen, A. S. et al. Mechanism of Ca2+/calmodulin-
dependent kinase II regulation of AMPA receptor 
gating. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 727–735 (2011).
133. Banke, T . G. et al. Control of GluR1 AMPA receptor 
function by cAMP-dependent protein kinase. 
J. Neurosci. 20, 89–102 (2000).
134. Lee, H. K., T akamiya, K., He, K., Song, L. & 
Huganir, R. L. Specific roles of AMPA receptor subunit 
GluR1 (GluA1) phosphorylation sites in regulating 
synaptic plasticity in the CA1 region of hippocampus. 
J. Neurophysiol. 103, 479–489 (2010).
135. Steinberg, J. P . et al. T argeted in vivo mutations of 
the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 and its interacting 
protein PICK1 eliminate cerebellar long-term 
depression. Neuron 49, 845–860 (2006).
136. Luchkina, N. V. et al. Developmental switch in the 
kinase dependency of long-term potentiation depends 
on expression of GluA4 subunit-containing AMPA 
receptors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 4321–4326 
(2014).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE   VOLUME 17 | JUNE 2016 | 349
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
137. Henley, J. M., Craig, T . J. & Wilkinson, K. A. Neuronal 
SUMOylation: mechanisms, physiology, and roles in 
neuronal dysfunction. Physiol. Rev. 94, 1249–1285 
(2014).
138. Sanderson, J. L. et al. AKAP150-anchored calcineurin 
regulates synaptic plasticity by limiting synaptic 
incorporation of Ca2+-permeable AMPA receptors. 
J. Neurosci. 32, 15036–15052 (2012).
139. Kim, S. & Ziff, E. B. Calcineurin mediates synaptic 
scaling via synaptic trafficking of Ca2+-permeable 
AMPA receptors. PLoS Biol. 12, e1001900  
(2014).
140. Diering, G. H., Gustina, A. S. & Huganir, R. L. PKA–
GluA1 coupling via AKAP5 controls AMPA receptor 
phosphorylation and cell-surface targeting during 
bidirectional homeostatic plasticity. Neuron 84,  
790–805 (2014).
141. Guire, E. S., Oh, M. C., Soderling, T . R. & 
Derkach, V. A. Recruitment of calcium-permeable 
AMPA receptors during synaptic potentiation is 
regulated by CaM-kinase I. J. Neurosci. 28,  
6000–6009 (2008).
142. Hampel, H. et al. The future of Alzheimer’s disease: 
the next 10 years. Prog. Neurobiol. 95, 718–728 
(2011).
143. Shankar, G. M. et al. Amyloid-β protein dimers 
isolated directly from Alzheimer’s brains impair 
synaptic plasticity and memory. Nat. Med. 14,  
837–842 (2008).
144. Walsh, D. M. & Selkoe, D. J. Aβ oligomers — a decade 
of discovery. J. Neurochem. 101, 1172–1184  
(2007).
145. Zhao, W. Q. et al. Inhibition of calcineurin-mediated 
endocytosis and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors prevents 
amyloid β oligomer-induced synaptic disruption. 
J. Biol. Chem. 285, 7619–7632 (2010).
146. Whitcomb, D. J. et al. Intracellular oligomeric amyloid-
beta rapidly regulates GluA1 subunit of AMPA 
receptor in the hippocampus. Sci. Rep. 5, 10934 
(2015).
147. Spaethling, J. M., Klein, D. M., Singh, P . & 
Meaney, D. F. Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors 
appear in cortical neurons after traumatic mechanical 
injury and contribute to neuronal fate. J. Neurotrauma 
25, 1207–1216 (2008).
148. Grooms, S. Y., Opitz, T ., Bennett, M. V. & Zukin, R. S. 
Status epilepticus decreases glutamate receptor 2 
mRNA and protein expression in hippocampal 
pyramidal cells before neuronal death. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 97, 3631–3636 (2000).
149. Yamashita, T . & Kwak, S. The molecular link between 
inefficient GluA2 Q/R site-RNA editing and TDP-43 
pathology in motor neurons of sporadic amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis patients. Brain Res. 1584, 28–38 
(2014).
150. Sommer, B., Kohler, M., Sprengel, R. & Seeburg, P . H. 
RNA editing in brain controls a determinant of ion 
flow in glutamate-gated channels. Cell 67, 11–19 
(1991).
151. Verdoorn, T . A., Burnashev, N., Monyer, H., 
Seeburg, P . H. & Sakmann, B. Structural determinants 
of ion flow through recombinant glutamate receptor 
channels. Science 252, 1715–1718 (1991).
152. Hestrin, S. Different glutamate receptor channels 
mediate fast excitatory synaptic currents in inhibitory 
and excitatory cortical neurons. Neuron 11, 1083–1091 
(1993).
153. Clem, R. L. & Barth, A. Pathway-specific trafficking of 
native AMPARs by in vivo experience. Neuron 49, 
663–670 (2006).
154. Goel, A. et al. Cross-modal regulation of synaptic 
AMPA receptors in primary sensory cortices by visual 
experience. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1001–1003 (2006).
155. Goel, A. et al. Phosphorylation of AMPA receptors is 
required for sensory deprivation-induced homeostatic 
synaptic plasticity. PLoS ONE 6, e18264 (2011).
156. Clem, R. L., Anggono, V. & Huganir, R. L. PICK1 
regulates incorporation of calcium-permeable AMPA 
receptors during cortical synaptic strengthening. 
J. Neurosci. 30, 6360–6366 (2010).
157. Bellone, C. & Luscher, C. mGluRs induce a long-term 
depression in the ventral tegmental area that involves 
a switch of the subunit composition of AMPA 
receptors. Eur. J. Neurosci. 21, 1280–1288 (2005).
158. Bellone, C. & Luscher, C. Cocaine triggered AMPA 
receptor redistribution is reversed in vivo by mGluR-
dependent long-term depression. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 
636–641 (2006).
159. Conrad, K. L. et al. Formation of accumbens 
GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors mediates incubation of 
cocaine craving. Nature 454, 118–121 (2008).
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the UK Medical Research 
Council (MRC), BBSRC, Alzheimer’s Society, BRACE and 
British Heart Foundation for financial support. They thank 
A. Evans and R. Carmichael for critical reading and 
constructive suggestions.
Competing interests statement 
The authors declare no competing interests.
REVIEWS
350 | JUNE 2016 | VOLUME 17  www.nature.com/nrn
©
 
2016
 
Mac mill an
 
Publishers
 
Li mited.
 
All
 
ri ghts
 
reserved.
